### Bilkent University Semester of Spring 2025<br/>Department of Computer Engineering
# CS481 Bioinformatics Algorithms<br/>Homework Assignment #3: Multiple Sequence Alignment

## Assignment Information
### Author
Deniz Tuna ONGUNER  
Bilkent ID: 22001788  

### Date
18 April 2025

### Course Information
**Section:** 1  
**Instructor:** Can ALKAN  

### Encoding & Language
**Encoding:** UTF-8  
**Language:** Python  
**Recommended Python Interpreter:** 3.12.4  
**Required Minimum Python Interpreter:** 3.10.0

## Aim of the Assignment
The objective of this assignment is to study multiple sequence alignment using pair-wise alignment and
center-star alignment.

## How to Run the Code
This assigment includes multiple Python scripts that implement center-star alignment and pair-wise alignment algorithms. The main script is `hw3.py`, which serves as the entry point for executing the program.

### Prerequisites
Ensure you have at least Python 3.10.0 installed. You can check your version using:
```sh
python --version
```

### Running the Code
To run the main script, use the Makefile provided. The commands are as follows:

- **Run the script with arguments:**
  ```sh
  make RUN ARGS=" [-h] -i INPUT_FILEPATH -o OUTPUT_FILEPATH -s MATCH:MISMATCH:OPENING:GAP "
  ```
  Replace `INPUT_FILEPATH` with the path to your input file, `OUTPUT_FILEPATH` with the desired output file path, 
  and `MATCH`, `MISMATCH`, `OPENING`, and `GAP` with your scoring parameters.  
  `.phy` files are generated as output files, which can be opened with any text editor.
<br/><br/>
  Example usage:
  ```sh
  make RUN ARGS="-i input.fasta -o output.phy -s 5:-4:-16:-4"
  ```

- **Show a message about Python not being compiled:**
  ```sh
  make COMPILE
  ```
  This command is included because it is demanded in the assignment document, but Python is an interpreted language and does not require compilation; hence, it just prints a message and serves as a placeholder.


- **Clean cache files:**
  ```sh
  make CLEAN
  ```
  This command removes cache files generated by Python, i.e. `__pycache__`, `.pyc`, and `.pyo` files.


- **Clean all files:**
  ```sh
  make CLEANALL
  ```
  This command removes all cache files and output files, i.e. `.txt` files, except for the `README.txt` file.


- **Show the help message:**
  ```sh
  make HELP
  ```

## Explanation of the Makefile
The provided `Makefile` automates the execution of the Python script. Below is a breakdown of its functionalities:

- Detects the appropriate Python command (`python3.12`, `python3.11`, or `python3.10`) based on the installed versions.
- Defines the main script (`hw3.py`) and its arguments.
- Provides targets:
  - `ALL`: Runs the default execution.
  - `COMPILE`: Placeholder target (since Python is interpreted, not compiled).
  - `RUN`: Executes `hw3.py` with provided arguments.
  - `CLEAN`: Removes cache files (`__pycache__`, `.pyc`, `.pyo`).
  - `CLEANALL`: Removes cache files and output files, i.e. `.txt` files, except for the `README.txt` file.
  - `HELP`: Displays usage instructions.

## Files in the Assignment
- `hw3.py` - Entry point of the program, parse command-line arguments, and handles file I/O.
- `center_star_alignment.py` - Implements the needleman-wunsch and the center-star alignment algorithms.
- `phylip.py` - Implements the phylip format for outputting the alignment results.
- `hw3_test.py` - Runs center-star alignment with random sequences and plots the results.
- `dataset_generator.py` - Generates random and non-random sequences for testing.

Note that the `hw3_test.py` file is not required for the assignment but is included as it has been used to generate the plots in the report.
It can safely be disregarded if you are not interested in the process of generating the plots.

## Libraries Used
- **argparse** - For parsing command-line arguments, in `hw3.py`.
- **os** - For file operations, in `hw3.py`.
- **typing** - For type hinting, in `hw3.py`.
- **random** - For generating random sequences, in `dataset_generator.py`.
- **matplotlib** - For plotting the alignment results, in `hw3_test.py`.
- **numpy** - For numerical operations regarding plotting, in `hw3_test.py`.
- **collections** - For using `defaultdict`, in `hw3_test.py`.

Please be in consideration that `numpy` is only used for plotting purposes and not for the alignment algorithms.

## References
GitHub Repositories Referred:
- [1] burakkose. (n.d.). center‑star‑msa [Source code]. GitHub. Retrieved April 18, 2025, from https://github.com/burakkose/center-star-msa
- [2] malabz. (n.d.). Jtmsa [Source code]. GitHub. Retrieved April 18, 2025, from https://github.com/malabz/Jtmsa
- [3] malabz. (n.d.). HAlign‑3 [Source code]. GitHub. Retrieved April 18, 2025, from https://github.com/malabz/HAlign-3
- [4] ATalhaTimur. (n.d.). Needleman‑Wunsch‑Algorithm [Source code]. GitHub. Retrieved April 18, 2025, from https://github.com/ATalhaTimur/Needleman-Wunsch-Algorithm

Papers:
- [1] Ilinkin, I., Ye, J., & Janardan, R. (2010). Multiple structure alignment and consensus identification for proteins. BMC bioinformatics, 11, 71. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-71
- [2] Wang, L., & Jiang, T. (1994). On the complexity of multiple sequence alignment. Journal of computational biology : a journal of computational molecular cell biology, 1(4), 337–348. https://doi.org/10.1089/cmb.1994.1.337
